This episode is brought to you by curiosity stream,
a subscription streaming service that offers thousands documentaries and
nonfiction titles for just 2 99 a month.
Get a free 30 day trial by clicking on the link in the description below more on
them in just a bit.
We're all familiar mummies. Whenever we say the word,
we typically think of the ones from ancient DJ brat in linen and placed in Sarov
guy. We find them fascinating because they represent a distinctive aspect of an
ancient civilization, but the Egyptians didn't have a monopoly on mummies. No,
in fact, in recent decades,
scientists have been growing increasingly enthusiastic over a different kind of
the bog bodies.
What are they well like their name implies they're human bodies that have been
found in Pete bogs. These environments have a unique set of characteristics,
which is pretty amazing at preserving organic material for hundreds or even
thousands of years,
cadavers that have simply been thrown in the bog had been naturally mummified
and remained an excellent condition for aging is until they were finally dug out
again or more than one occasion.
One of these bog bodies was initially treated as a recent death,
perhaps even a murder victim because it looks like it only died a short while
ago.
The most famous bog body of all is arguably the to man and the good reason he
has been called the perfect corpse by various scholars because his head is so
remarkably well preserve even by the standards of bog bodies,
people from the silk bog museum in Denmark,
where the tall man is on permanent display have reported visitors,
being a struck others, breaking down in tears,
and really even fainting when looking into the face of this man who appears to
have died peacefully just a few years ago, but in reality,
he's been dead for well over 2000 years,
the tall man in a completely unique glimpse into our ancient past.
And today we're gonna bring you a story.
It was a Monday morning on may the eighth,
1950 in the town of silk war in Denmark.
And the police received a distressing message about a potential murder victim
that may have been killed and then dump to nearby Pete bog at some town I can't
possibly pronounce about 10 kilometers away.
This message came from two brothers who were professional,
Pete cutters named Vigo and Emma Hogart alongside Vi's wife, Greece,
and our stepson John.
They had spent the weekend deep in the bog on Saturday may the sixth Greece was
the first to notice something strange buried in the Pete. They done,
I get outta it only enough to realize that it was the body of a human.
It had been mummified and the P and exceptionally well preserved.
So it was not surprising that the family initially thought they had stumbled
onto the victim of a crime. At the time,
there was a boy in Copenhagen who had gone missing.
So the Pete cutters fears that it may have been his remains that they have
discovered the body was still covered in too much peat to distinguish any
notable features, but they could tell that it had a rope around its neck.
On Monday. Police arrived on the scene.
They found out from the Hodge guards that the body had been buried about 60
meters away from solid ground in a location that showed no signs of recent
digging.
Add to that the fact that it was buried beneath two and a half meters of peace
and the authority suspected that the body might not have been as fresh as the
family initially suspected. And in fact,
it might be a matter for the super bowl museum rather than the police people
from the museum showed up the next day and confirmed their suspicions.
They had a bog body on their hands,
and there was no way of telling how old it truly was without analyzing it in the
lab. This was due to the unique natural environment found in Pete box.
The main culprits is Pete MOS, the plants that is ubiquitous in such areas.
It creates something called bog acid,
which can impede the development of bacteria.
This plus the anaerobic or low oxygen environment creates an ideal scenario
where organic material barely decompose.
So bodies stay remarkably well preserved for countless years after they eye,
the local press was all over the news,
but it needed a caption name for the unidentified body. Some of them called it,
the man from bog Villa,
although at the time it was still not certain yet that the body belonged to a
man or a woman the remains were found at that town that I names that doesn't
exactly roll off the tongue. So instead archeologists,
PV GL decided to name the body after the small nearby village where the whole
guards came from. And well, so the world was introduced to the, to man
At the time of the discovery, bog bodies were not a new concept. In fact,
a different body known as E woman had been found a short distance from the to
man just 12 years prior,
plenty of others had been discovered throughout Europe and Denmark in particular
proved to be a rich resource of such anomalies.
But the natural preservation of these remains turned out to be the easy part
because then came the difficult task of actually removing the to man from the
bogs, taking it to a laboratory or without completely destroying it,
just like the mummies of Egypt,
great care was needed when removing these bodies from the environment they have
done for thousands of years,
otherwise exposure to regular atmospheric conditions could have had an immediate
and irreversible damaging effect on the remains up until then.
This hadn't really been done successfully on a bog body before,
at least not on one that was tagged and in such good condition as the top man,
there was one notable exception and she was called the Harold scare.
Women found all the way back in 1835.
This body of a woman was so well preserved that it still contained every organ.
For some reason,
people at the time believed that the body must belong to queen Gunhill of
Norway. An important figure in the Icelandic sagas, therefore king Frederick,
the sick ordered that she be given an exhumation worthy of a Royal Sarah remains
were carefully removed, intact and placed inside a fancy coffin.
Although the unintentional,
this had the fortuitous side effect of preserving the body in good condition.
She wasn't queen Gunhill by the way. In fact,
she just came from the iron age and lived about 1,500 years earlier than the
queen, but her remains had been maintained well enough that even in the year,
2000, when scientists reexamined her with new technology,
they could still tell what food was in her stomach. It was black reason,
unha mil, in case you were wondering. Anyway,
the point is that Danish authorities wanted to be extra careful with removing
the tall man from his slumber in the bog,
because specimens like him did not come along that often his head in particular
was in a state of preservation, unlike anything seen before or after.
For that matter. Other examples,
even the Howard scare women still looked like mummies. The tall man,
however did not. His nose still retained its shape.
His eyelids had not sunk it into the sockets.
You could still see the furrows on his brow. You could still see his hair.
And even the faintest traces of beards double the transportation of the body was
by people from the silk board museum.
Plus the two brothers who found it as well as a few policemen.
The first thing they did was dig around the remains. So the to man was left,
elevated on a peak platform. They then placed the box.
He would be carried in around him, but without the top or the bottom afterwards,
they started inserting planks underneath the box one by one to make the bottom.
And finally they placed the lid on this way.
They had the tall man in a box ready to be transported to the national museum of
Denmark in Copenhagen, but nobody had actually touched him.
And he was still encased in the same Pete that he had been for countless ages.
Now, before we continue with today's video, let me thank today's sponsor.
Curiosity stream curiosity stream is a subscription streaming service,
that office thousands of documentaries and,
and fiction titles from some of the world's best film cuz including exclusive
originals, curiosity stream is available on many platforms and web apps,
including Roku, Android, Xbox one smart TVs, iOS Chromecast, Amazon fire,
Amazon Kindle, apple TV.
It's a long list it's offered worldwide and it's constantly updated with amazing
timely content. Right now, for instance,
they have a popular new documentary series called op science stories of 2020.
Obviously it features profiles on COVID 19, but it also dives into CRISPR,
the Mars Rover, fossilized DNA,
and several other exciting things that you might have missed last year.
If you like a good Corp story and you're enjoying today's video,
I might recommend 30 episodes of crime scene solvers of series.
That's available to watch on curiosity stream,
plenty of decompos mutilated or just generally weird or gross dead bodies for
you. Weirdos on there right now you get curiosity,
stream.com/biographics from unlimited access to the world's top documentaries
and non-fiction series for only 2 99 a month or 1999 for the whole
year. And right now is a special deal for you guys.
You can get 30 days as a trial to try it out,
just use biographics of checkout and let's get back to today's video
At the museum in Copenhagen,
the examination of the bog body began as scientists laboriously removed the Pete
bit by bit. So as not to cause any damage, the remains,
eventually they were able to get a full picture of what the to man actually
looked like.
The first thing to notice was that the body was not as well preserved as the
head it a trunk, but this was to be expected.
The left side in particular was partially decomposed because it was the side
that faced upwards in the bog. As the body sat in the fetal position,
the arms and hands were almost completely skeletonized.
The right side of the face fed much better.
And even the skin remained intacted for the most part, the arm man,
add a appointed leather cap on his head.
It had been made from eight separate pieces of sheep skin,
which were sewn together. And the first side had been turned inwards.
There were also two leather straps on the sides,
which were tied together under the chin to keep the hat in place underneath his
cap. The taller man had short air, a few centimeters in length.
It was red as was his beard stub,
but this coloration was due to the bog water and not his natural hair color.
Other than his cap, the tall man was naked, which was odd.
Since most other bog bodies had been found either wearing clothes or having
their clothes placed on top or next to them,
there are a few possible explanations for this one, one,
he was thrown in the bog, it two,
his clothes had been placed next to him and over millennia due to Pete digging
on some of the reason they had drifted away and become lost. Three,
the most likely scenario was that clothes simply rotted away.
He might have been wearing only a simple TNIC made out of vegetable fibers,
which would not have survived in the acidic environment of the box.
The idea is reinforced by the fact that the, to man did they,
leather belts made of oxide tied around his waist.
It seems unlikely that someone would've stripped him naked,
but left his belt on. Lastly, there was also the rope tied around his neck.
It doesn't really count as clothing or accessories.
It more likely it was the murder weapon, but the cap, the belts and the rope,
but the only items that were found with the, to man
By examining the body scientists were able to determine the age of the to man
when he died.
Mainly this was established by analyzing his teeth as well as other telltale
signs,
such as the presence of adhesions on the skull and Coxy and arthritis of the
sternum,
which showed that the to man had the early stages of cost a Citis today,
those symptoms would suggest a person of 40,
but that is in our modern world while the biological aging of the body would
occur at faster rate a thousand years ago, therefore the,
to man's age was revised a bit downward and estimated to be between 30 and 40
years. At the time of his death,
he measured 161 centimeters in height when he was excavated or five foot three,
but he almost certainly lost few centimeters due to shrinkage during his time in
the bog.
So he would've been taller in real life and probably of average height for that
era.
X-rays revealed that the interior had been just about as well preserved as the
exterior, all the organs were still there,
although they had lost volume and had been flattened by the pressure inside the
PE bog, the brain was intact, although it too,
it shrunken due to loss of moisture. The vertebrae were unbroken,
although all signs pointed to the, to and having been hanged.
But this was parter to say with certainty due to advanced decalcification of the
bones, scientists took special interest in the stomach and the large intestines,
since it wasn't every day that they were able to directly analyze the diet of a
prehistoric man,
they managed to extract around 250 mills or eight and a half ounces of stomach
content that constituted the to man's last meal.
He consumed 12 to 24 hours before his death,
as it had already made its way through the stomach and into the large intestine,
it consisted of a, Poage made a barley FLA seed and seeds from various plants,
such as knotweed, oat, and a her known as gold of pleasure decades later,
one British archeologist tried recreating the meal for a BBC program and
described it simply as disgusting.
Now we arrive at the big question. How old is the to man?
When the bog body was originally discovered,
carbon dating was still a few years away from being developed.
So scientists were unable to provide us with an accurate answer immediately by
analyzing pollen samples taken from around the body. During the excavation,
all they could really say was that the to man was younger than the stone age,
but then carbon dating became a thing in several tests,
all placed the bog body sometime between two thousand two hundred and two
thousand four hundred years ago during the early iron age,
also known as the pre Roman era of Northern Europe,
as the technology kept improving, the dating became more accurate.
The most recent deaths performed just a few years ago,
narrowed the window down even further by using accelerator mass spectrometry on
bone collagen samples,
recovered from the Tolu man's femur and rib scientists stated the FEMA to 2,330
years ago, plus, or minus 23 years in the rib, roughly the same,
this plus all the previous data, but the birth of the Tolu man,
somewhere between 405 and 380 BC,
Or some scientists were busy conducting all kinds of high tech tests on the Tolu
man's body to gather all the information they could.
Other archeologists and forensic examiners wanted to study the case from a
different perspective,
that of a murder there is after all little doubt that the,
to man died by hanging.
Even if the cervical vertebrae were not broken contrary to popular belief,
this doesn't always happen.
It is the main difference between the long drop and the short drop methods of
hanging the long drop,
which was adopted much later in history was considered the more humane approach
by dropping the condemned from a higher distance.
The impact was greater and was designed to break the neck resulting in a,
a faster death.
The downside to this technique was that sometimes the impact was too great,
either because the executioner misjudged the distance or because of the weight
of the condemned and the drop caused the head to pop clean off the wild west
outlaw black Jack catch him as an infamous example of this happening.
Although in his case, the drop was too high and the rope was too rigid. Anyway,
with the short drop,
that was no care given to the height from which the condemned was dropped
because they were going to be killed by suffocation.
And that is what happened to the,
to man scientists also found some distinction of the tongue,
which is another sign consistent with suffocation.
Multiple forensic specialists have examined the bog body and they all agreed
that he was killed by hanging.
But the other question of course is why they can only speculate on this point.
Since we have little to no information about the people of Northern Europe from
that time period, tacito the Roman historian gave us a good idea.
When he wrote down accounts of Roman traders who ventured into the north and
encountered the tribes there,
he said that traders and renegades hang in those trees,
cowards gutless,
and on natural fornicators pressed down under a Wicker hurdle to the slimy
mud of a bog. Sure.
Tacitus wrote about 400 years after the to man was already dead,
but his point was still valid. Could the,
to man have been executed for being a criminal or a trait, it is possible,
but scholars think it's unlikely due to the care that was shown to him after his
death. They reckon that if the,
to man was despised by the people who killed him, they would not have carried,
meet him to the Pete bog afterwards and placed him in a sleeping feet or
position.
Not to mention that some things that they also closed his eyes and mouth to give
him a more peaceful, demeanor.
The alternative that most scholars consider most likely was that the,
to man was some kind of human sacrifice.
They don't know why he was chosen or what God he was sacrificed to.
But the circumstantial evidence seems to point in that direction.
The starters we know from Roman historians,
the sacrificing humans was practiced by the various tribes of the north.
Then there are also the circumstances of the, to mans bog, burials,
starting with the fact that he was buried in the first place,
the archeological syndicates that Northern European tribes during the iron H
mainly practiced cremation while some people of high status were placed in
caskets and buried alongside their possessions, neither of these applied to the,
to man, which means that he belonged to a special group.
And the only one we know of is human sacrifices.
It's still a long way from a definitive answer,
but we're probably never going to know for certain,
The story of the to man has continued and devolved in the seven decades since he
was dug outta the Pete BOS,
new chapters are always being added mainly as technology progresses,
despite their best efforts, scientists were not able to preserve to man,
as they found him,
they simply did not have technology or the know how back in 1950 plus some
scholars were worried that it looked a bit too.
Me carbed as display like that since the left half had partially decomposed,
that is why they focused on saving the head. They were successful.
They carefully severed the head from the rest of the body and developed a new
preservation technique,
which involved replacing all the bog water cells in its head with wax,
that it retained its exact shape. However,
this cannot be to on directly since the tube wouldn't mix.
So instead they first had to put the head in alcohol to replace the bog water
NAED was put in a disillusion liquid named Tula law to replace the alcohol and
then in liquid para to replace the teal. Only after that,
could it finally be placed and melted BEWA,
which inserted itself into the cells of the head and replaced the para.
This new process was successful.
And the head of the to man remains looking just as the day,
it was dragged outta the bog, although it had shrunk by 12%,
the limbs in the torso Harbor did not undergo this process.
Instead they were dried out,
split into pieces and sent for various tests and autopsies a few decades.
After the discovery,
during the 1980s scientists thought that maybe they could try and assemble the
whole body.
It began that bizarre west to try and find all the missing parts which have been
sent to various museums and institutes.
Eventually they managed to find everything except the internal organs and one
toe from the right foot,
which had clearly been sort off the location of the toe remained a mystery until
2016. When a woman named Bert Brosen Christensen called the sofa,
Borg museum then told them that she had the man's big toe. She was right too.
Tests showed that the mummified toe in her possession was a perfect match.
The one missing from the foot.
So how did she end up owning thes toe of a 2,400 year old Bo
body?
As it turns out her father bog boson Christianson was one of the people who
worked on researching new preservation methods for the to man ber remembered
quite vividly that when she was growing up,
her father had a whole foot in a jar of blue liquid on his desk.
The towy kept in a smaller jar,
which he'd like to carry around with him and even bring to the dinner table
after he died, his widow kept it.
And then it ended up with bar who reunited the toe with the rest of the Tolu
man's body. Unfortunately, despite their best efforts,
the reassembled body of the, to man was not fit the show one,
which is on display to dead. The silk Borg museum is replica,
but the head is still the genuine article.
The internal organs are still missing though.
So if you happen to encounter a Jale of mummified organs on your travels,
the silk Borg museum might be interested in hearing from you.
So I really hope you found that video in. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button. Hello.
Don't forget to subscribe it as always. Thank you for watching.